# .NET Concepts

## Internals

- Assembly: One or more modules deployed as a unit compose an assembly. An assembly contains a manifest, and one or more modules.
- Manifest: The manifest contains metadata for an assembly. It includes - assembly version, publisher, culture, strong name (if the assembly is signed), list of publicly exported types, list of modules in the assembly, list of referenced assemblies.
- Module: A module is a portable executable file, such as DLL or EXE, consisting of one or more classes and interfaces. There may be multiple namespaces contained in a single module, and a namespace may span multiple modules. Modules contain classes.
- Application Domain: An application domain provides an isolation boundary for security, reliability, and versioning and for unloading assemblies. Application domain is typically created by runtime host, which are responsible for bootstrapping the CRL before an application is run. An assembly must be loaded into an application domain before it can execute the code it contains. System Domain / Application Domain.
- Stack: A stack is an abstract data type that serves as a collection of elements, with two main principal operations - push, pop. There are two types of stacks - managed (contains managed code) and native (does not contain managed code). Stack allocation is linear using LIFO order.
- Heap: Heap memory is a dynamic memory. It is an alternative to stack memory, where dynamically allocated memory resides. Managed heap is garbage collected. Native does not have garbage collection.
- Thread: Allows an application to perform multiple operations at the same time. The multiple threads of a given process may be executed concurrently, sharing resources such as memory, handles, etc. Managed thread contains managed code and native thread does not.
- Memory Space: Virtual memory space abstracts the full memory space for a process. User space (00000000`00000000 - 00000000`7FFFFFFF) is the application part of the virtual space and kernel space (FFFF8000`00000000 - FFFFFFFF`FFFFFFFF) is the OS part.

## CLR (Runtime)

- System Domain: Creates the Shared Domain & Default Domains. Handles string interning and Interface ID (used in InterfaceVtableMaps). Tracks all Application Domains. Handles loading and unloading of Application Domains.
- Shared Domain [.NET Framework Only]: All of the domain-neutral code is loaded into the Shared Domain. The system library required by the user code () and fundamental types (e.g. Object, ValueType, Array, String, etc. ) is also loaded into this domain.
- Default Domain: Contains the user code. If an application has multiple Default Domains, any cross-domain access will occur through .NET Remoting proxies.
- Loader Heaps: Contain various CLR runtime and optimization artifacts. High-Frequency Heap contains MethodTable, MethodDesc, FieldDescs and Interface Map instances. Low-Frequency Heap contains EEClass, ClassLoader and its lookup tables instances. Stub Heap contains CAS, COM wrapper calls and P/Invoke artifacts.
- GC Heaps: SOH (Ephemeral) contains GC Gen 0, 1, 2 objects. LOH contains large (85k+) objects. POH contains pinned objects.
- ObjectRef: Pointer to SyncBlk reference and ObjectInstance.
- SyncBlk: Contains object instance lock, hash code, thunking data and its AppDomain index.
- ObjectInstance: Contains pointer to TypeHandle and instance fields.
- TypeHandle: Pointer to MethodTable.
- MethodTable: One for each declared type. All the object instances of the same type will point to the same MethodTable. Contains information about the kind of type (interface, abstract class, concrete class, COM Wrapper and proxy), static fields, number of interfaces implemented, Interface Vtable Map, interface map for method dispatch, the number of slots in the method table and a table of slots that point to method implementations and MethodDesc. The MethodTable contains a pointer to EEClass.
- EEClass: The CLR class loader creates EEClass from the metadata before MethodTable is laid out. This structure point to the application modules and assemblies.
- MethodDesc: Represents CRL method implementation. Initially points to IL. 
- Method Dispatch: Direct - call instance methods. Interface-based - uses Interface Vtable Map and slot. Virtual - uses fixed method slot number.
- .cctor: Class constructor to initialize static fields.
- .ctor: Object constructor to initialize object instance.
- ClassLoader: Loads the assembly types and constructs EEClass and MethodTable structures.
- String Interning: Applies to string literals only and used to prevent duplicates. It is based on String Literal Map in native heap that contains hashes and references to entries in the Large Heap Handle Table (String Intern Pool) which in turn contains references to string objects in SOH/LOH heaps.

## Framework (Type System)

- Namespace: Namespaces provides a hierarchical means of organizing .NET programs and libraries. Namespace contains types and other namespaces.
- Type: Type defines the structure and behavior of any data
  - Value Type: Value type directly contains its data. Value types - Primitive (Simple), Structure (struct), Enumeration (enum), Nullable Value Types, Value Tuple.
  - Reference Type: Reference type stores reference to its data. Reference types - Class, Generic Class, Anonymous Type, Array, String, Interface, Delegate, Attribute, Exception.
- Instance (Variable): Variable is a label that refers to an instance of a specific type.
- Member: Type element (data or code).
  - Member Lifetime: Instance, Static.
  - Member Type: Constant, Field, Method, Property, Indexer, Event, Operator, Constructor, Finalizer, Nested Types.
  - Accessibility: Controls the regions of program text that can access the member. Accessibility modifiers - public, private, protected, internal, protected internal, private protected.
  - Method Components: Parameters, Return Type, Signature, Virtual, Override, Abstract, Overloading, Extension
- Lambda Expression: Creates an anonymous function.
  - Expression Lambda: Single statement.
  - Lambda Statement: Collection of statements.
  - Lambda Expression Type: Delegate, Expression Tree.
- Boxing / Unboxing: Boxing wraps value inside object and stores in on the heap. Unboxing extracts value from object.
- Asynchronous Programming (TPL): Provides standard patterns for performing I/O-bound and compute-bound asynchronous operations.
  - Asynchronous Programming Model (APM): Asynchronous operations are represented by a pair of begin/end methods.
    For example: FileStream.BeginRead and Stream.EndRead.
  - Event-based Asynchronous Pattern (EAP): Asynchronous operations are represented by a method/event pair that are named <OperationName>Async and <OperationName>Completed.
    For example: WebClient.DownloadStringAsync and WebClient.DownloadStringCompleted.
  - Asynchronous Return Types: Task, Task<T>, ValueTask<TResult>
- Synchronization: Types that provide synchronized access to a shared resource or coordinate thread interaction.
  - Primitives: Monitor (lock), Mutex, SpinLock, ReaderWriterLockSlim, Semaphore, SemaphoreSlim, EventWaitHandle, AutoResetEvent, ManualResetEvent, ManualResetEventSlim,
    AsyncManualResetEvent, CountdownEvent, Barrier, Interlocked, SpinWait, TaskCompletionSource<T>, AsyncLock

## JIT Optimizations

- Enable JIT compilation summary: $env:DOTNET_JitDisasmSummary=1
- Display Disassembly: $env:DOTNET_JitDisasm="<Console>.Program:Main"
- Enable full JIT disassembly (disable Ready To Run images): $env:DOTNET_ReadyToRun=0
- Enable Dynamic Profile Guided Optimization (PGO): $env:DOTNET_TieredPGO=1

## Glossary

- CAS: Code Access Security
- CCW: COM Callable Wrapper
- CLR: Common Language Runtime
- COM: Component Object Model
- CPU: Central Processing Unit
- EE: Execution Engine
- GC: Garbage Collector
- IL: Intermediate Language
- JIT: Just In Time
- LIFO: Last In First Out
- LINQ: Language Integrated Query
- LOH: Large Object Heap
- MD: Method Descriptor
- MSIL: Microsoft Intermediate Language
- OOM: Out Of Memory
- OS: Operating System
- PEB: Process Environment Block
- POH: Pinned Object Heap
- RCW: Runtime Callable Wrapper
- SOH: Small Object Heap
- SOS: Son Of Strike
- TEB: Thread Environment Block
- TPL: Task Parallel Library

## SOS

### Commands

analyzeoom, AnalyzeOOM                                   Displays the info of the last OOM that occurred on an allocation request to the GC heap.
assemblies, clrmodules                                   Lists the managed assemblies in the process.
clrstack <arguments>                                     Provides a stack trace of managed code only.
clrthreads <arguments>                                   Lists the managed threads running.
crashinfo                                                Displays the crash details that created the dump.
dbgout <arguments>                                       Enables/disables (-off) internal SOS logging.
dumpalc <arguments>                                      Displays details about a collectible AssemblyLoadContext into which the specified object is loaded.
dumparray <arguments>                                    Displays details about a managed array.
dumpassembly <arguments>                                 Displays details about an assembly.
dumpasync, DumpAsync                                     Displays information about async "stacks" on the garbage-collected heap.
dumpclass <arguments>                                    Displays information about a EE class structure at the specified address.
dumpconcurrentdictionary, dcd <address>                  Displays concurrent dictionary content.
dumpconcurrentqueue, dcq <address>                       Displays concurrent queue content.
dumpdelegate <arguments>                                 Displays information about a delegate.
dumpdomain <arguments>                                   Displays the Microsoft intermediate language (MSIL) that's associated with a managed method.
dumpexceptions                                           Displays a list of all managed exceptions.
dumpgcdata <arguments>                                   Displays information about the GC data.
dumpgen, dg <generation>                                 Displays heap content for the specified generation.
dumpheap, DumpHeap <memoryrange>                         Displays a list of all managed objects.
dumphttp, DumpHttp                                       Displays information about HTTP requests.
dumpil <arguments>                                       Displays the Microsoft intermediate language (MSIL) that is associated with a managed method.
dumplocks, DumpLocks                                     Displays information about System.Threading.Lock objects, such as those being held by threads (default), or those being waited upon by threads.
dumplog <arguments>                                      Writes the contents of an in-memory stress log to the specified file.
dumpmd <arguments>                                       Displays information about a MethodDesc structure at the specified address.
dumpmodule <arguments>                                   Displays information about a EE module structure at the specified address.
dumpmt <arguments>                                       Displays information about a method table at the specified address.
dumpobj, do <arguments>                                  Displays info about an object at the specified address.
dumpobjgcrefs <object>                                   A helper command to implement !dumpobj -refs
dumprequests, DumpRequests                               Displays all currently active incoming HTTP requests.
dumpruntimetypes, DumpRuntimeTypes                       Finds all System.RuntimeType objects in the GC heap and prints the type name and MethodTable they refer too.
dumpsig <arguments>                                      Dumps the signature of a method or field specified by <sigaddr> <moduleaddr>.
dumpsigelem <arguments>                                  Dumps a single element of a signature object.
dumpstackobjects, dso, DumpStackObjects <stackbounds>    Displays all managed objects found within the bounds of the current stack.
dumpvc <arguments>                                       Displays info about the fields of a value class.
eeheap, EEHeap <memoryrange>                             Displays information about native memory that CLR has allocated.
eeversion <arguments>                                    Displays information about the runtime version.
ehinfo <arguments>                                       Displays the exception handling blocks in a JIT-ed method.
enummem <arguments>                                      ICLRDataEnumMemoryRegions.EnumMemoryRegions test command.
ephrefs                                                  Finds older generation objects which reference objects in the ephemeral segment.
ephtoloh                                                 Finds ephemeral objects which reference the large object heap.
finalizequeue, fq, FinalizeQueue                         Displays all objects registered for finalization.
findappdomain <arguments>                                Attempts to resolve the AppDomain of a GC object.
gchandles <arguments>                                    Provides statistics about GCHandles in the process.
gcheapstat, GCHeapStat                                   Displays various GC heap stats.
gcinfo <arguments>                                       Displays JIT GC encoding for a method.
gcroot, GCRoot <target>                                  Displays info about references (or roots) to an object at the specified address.
gcwhere, GCWhere <address>                               Displays the location in the GC heap of the specified address.
help, soshelp <command>                                  Displays help for a command.
histclear <arguments>                                    Releases any resources used by the family of Hist commands.
histinit <arguments>                                     Initializes the SOS structures from the stress log saved in the debuggee.
histobj <arguments>                                      Examines all stress log relocation records and displays the chain of garbage collection relocations that may have led to  the address passed in as an argument.
histobjfind <arguments>                                  Displays all the log entries that reference an object at the specified address.
histroot <arguments>                                     Displays information related to both promotions and relocations of the specified root.
histstats <arguments>                                    Displays stress log stats.
ip2md <arguments>                                        Displays the MethodDesc structure at the specified address in code that has been JIT-compiled.
listnearobj, lno, ListNearObj <address>                  Displays the object preceding and succeeding the specified address.
loadsymbols <url>                                        Loads symbols for all modules.
logclose <path>                                          Disables console file logging.
logging <path>                                           Enables/disables internal diagnostic logging.
logopen <path>                                           Enables console file logging.
modules, lm                                              Displays the native modules in the process.
name2ee <arguments>                                      Displays the MethodTable structure and EEClass structure for the specified type or method in the specified module.
notreachableinrange <start> <end>                        A helper command for !finalizerqueue
objsize, ObjSize <objectaddress>                         Lists the sizes of the all the objects found on managed threads.
parallelstacks, pstacks                                  Displays the merged threads stack similarly to the Visual Studio 'Parallel Stacks' panel.
pathto, PathTo <source> <target>                         Displays the GC path from <root> to <target>.
printexception, pe <arguments>                           Displays and formats fields of any object derived from the Exception class at the specified address.
registers, r                                             Displays the thread's registers.
runtimes <id>                                            Lists the runtimes in the target or changes the default runtime.
setclrpath <path>                                        Sets the path to load coreclr DAC/DBI files.
setsymbolserver, SetSymbolServer <url>                   Enables and sets symbol server support for symbols and module download.
sizestats                                                Size statistics for the GC heap.
sosflush                                                 Resets the internal cached state.
sosstatus                                                Displays internal status.
syncblk <arguments>                                      Displays the SyncBlock holder info.
taskstate, tks <address>                                 Displays a Task state in a human readable format.
threadpool, ThreadPool                                   Displays info about the runtime thread pool.
threadpoolqueue, tpq                                     Displays queued ThreadPool work items.
threads, setthread <thread>                              Lists the threads in the target or sets the current thread.
threadstate <arguments>                                  Pretty prints the meaning of a threads state.
timerinfo, ti                                            Displays information about running timers.
traverseheap, TraverseHeap <filename>                    Writes out heap information to a file in a format understood by the CLR Profiler.
verifyheap, VerifyHeap <memoryrange>                     Searches the managed heap for memory corruption..
verifyobj, VerifyObj <objectaddress>                     Checks the given object for signs of corruption.
target modules list

## LLDB

### Process

- Display native modules (all, symbols): im li, image lookup -r -n <Symbol>, objdump -T <Library.so>
- Display managed modules: clrmodules
- Display all application domains: dumpdomain
- Display application domain of an object: sos FindAppDomain <ObjectAddress>
- Display assembly: dumpassembly <AssemblyAddress>
- Display module (summary, contained types): dumpmodule <ModuleAddress>, dumpmodule -mt <ModuleAddress>
- Display CLR version and GC mode: sos EEVersion

### Threads

- Display threads (all): thread list
- Change current thread: t N, threads N
- Display managed threads (all, live): clrthreads, clrthreads -live
- Display managed thread pools: threadpool
- Display queued thread pool work items: threadpoolqueue
- Display thread exception (current thread, specific thread, specific thread nested): pe, pe <ExceptionObjectAddress>, pe -nested
- Display read state details: sos ThreadState <State>

### Stack

- Display stack trace (current thread, all threads): bt, bt all
- Display stack trace using scraping (full, managed code only, full for all managed threads): dumpstack, dumpstack -EE, eestack
- Display stack trace managed code only (current thread, all threads): clrstack, clrstack -all
- Display managed stack or registry objects: dso, dso <StartAddress> <EndAddress>

### Objects

- Display managed heap (full, summary, by type, by MethodTable): dumpheap, dumpheap -stat, dumpheap -type <TypeName>, dumpheap -mt <MethodTable>
- Display MethodTable (full, full with methods): dumpmt <MethodTable>, dumpmt -MD <MethodTable>
- Display EEClass: dumpclass <EEClass>
- Display MethodTable and EEClass: name2ee <ModuleName> <TypeName|MethodName>, name2ee *!<TypeName|MethodName>
- Display object instance: dumpobj <Address>
- Display value class instance: sos DumpVC <MethodTable> <Address>
- Display array object elements: sos DumpArray <Address>
- Display objects representing async state machines (all, by type): dumpasync --completed --tasks, dumpasync --completed --tasks --type <TypeName>
- Display object managed heap location and size: sos GCWhere <ObjectAddress>
- Display object references (roots): gcroot <ObjectAddress>
- Display finalizable objects: finalizequeue
- Display SyncBlock: syncblk, syncblk -all
- Display System.* object types used in the current process: sos DumpRuntimeTypes
- Display CLR data structures (full, GC only, Assembly Loader only): eeheap, eeheap -gc, eeheap -loader
- Display object type AssemblyLoadContext: dumpalc <ObjectAddress>
- Display objects for a specific generation: dumpgen <gen0|gen1|gen2|loh|poh>

### Methods

- Display disassembly (current, current frame, method, range): di, di -f, di -n <Method>, di -s <StartAddress> -e <EndAddress>
- Display managed disassembly (current): clru
- Display MethodDesc: dumpmd <MethodDesc>
- Display MethodDesc for specified address that has been JIT compiled: ip2md <CodeAddress>
- Display managed method MSIL: dumpil <MethodDesc>
- Display exception handling blocks in a method (using code address, using MethodDesc): sos EHInfo <CodeAddress>, sos EHInfo <MethodDesc>
- Display MethodDesc structures associated with a delegate object: dumpdelegate <DelegateObjectAddress>

### Breakpoints

- Set managed code breakpoints (module method, specific method, MethodDesc, list, clear all): bpmd ByteZoo.Console.dll Program.Main, bpmd -md <MethodDesc>, bpmd -list, bpmd -clearall
- Set native code breakpoints (module method, method, list, delete): break set -s <Library.so> -r .*<Method>, br s -n <Method>, br l, br del <N>
- Set native watch (read/write): watch set expression -w read_write -s 8 -- <Address>
- Control execution (start, start with arguments, step over, step into, step out, resume): run, run arg1 arg2 arg3, n, ni, s, si, finish, continue

### Diagnostics

- Check managed heap for signs of corruption: sos VerifyHeap

### Utilities

- Display native command help: help, help <command>
- Display SOS extension command help: soshelp, soshelp <command>
- Display SOS extension status: sosstatus
- Display LLDB version: version
- Manage in-memory stress log file (save): dumplog <FileName>
- Manage GC history using stress log (initialize, references, relocations, movements): histinit, histobjfind <ObjectAddress>, histobj <ObjectAddress>, histroot <ObjectAddress>
- Display CPU registers: registers, register read
- Display method/field structure: sos DumpSig <SigAddress> <ModuleAddress>
- Display method/field structure single element: sos DumpSigElem <SigAddress> <ModuleAddress>
- Display MethodTable or MethodDesc for the specified metadata token: sos Token2EE <ModuleName> <Token>
- Evaluate expression (simple): expr <expression>

## WinDbg

### Process

- Display process (PEB, environment, times, memory): !peb, !ProcInfo
- Display process memory (summary, full): !address -summary, !address
- Display process memory region protection type (summary, full): !VMStat, !VMMap
- Display all modules (summary, details, summary pattern, details pattern): lm, lmv, lmm *clr*, lmvm *clr*
- Display all application domains: !DumpDomain
- Display application domain of an object: !FindAppDomain <ObjectAddress>
- Display assembly: !DumpAssembly <AssemblyAddress>
- Display module (summary, contained types): !DumpModule <ModuleAddress>, !DumpModule -mt <ModuleAddress>
- Display dump file OS version: version
- Display CLR version and GC mode: !EEVersion
- Display computer name: !envvar COMPUTERNAME

### Threads

- Display threads (summary, all, current, exception source, specific): ~, ~*, ~., ~#, ~0
- Change current thread: ~0s
- Display managed threads (all, include CLR threads): !Threads, !Threads -special
- Display managed thread pools: !ThreadPool
- Display thread exception (current thread, specific thread, specific thread nested, all threads): !PrintException, !pe <ExceptionObjectAddress>, !pe -nested, ~*e !pe
- Display read state details: !ThreadState <State>
- Display thread execution statistics (summary, user/kernel/elapsed): !runaway, !runaway 7
- Display thread: !teb

### Stack

- Display stack trace (current thread, current thread no source, all threads, all thread no source, remove duplicate stacks): k, kL, ~*k, ~*kL, !uniqstack
- Display stack trace using scraping (full, managed code only, full for all managed threads): !DumpStack, !DumpStack -EE, !EEStack
- Display stack trace managed code only (current thread, all threads): !CLRStack, !CLRStack -all
- Display managed stack or registry objects: !DumpStackObjects, !dso, !dso <StartAddress> <EndAddress>
- Display stacks that contain a symbol or module: !findstack <Name>, !findstack coreclr

### Objects

- Display managed heap (full, summary, by type, by MethodTable): !DumpHeap, !DumpHeap -stat, !DumpHeap -type <TypeName>, !DumpHeap -mt <MethodTable>
- Display MethodTable (full, full with methods): !DumpMT <MethodTable>, !DumpMT -MD <MethodTable>
- Display EEClass: !DumpClass <EEClass>
- Display MethodTable and EEClass: !Name2EE <ModuleName> <TypeName|MethodName>, !Name2EE *!<TypeName|MethodName>
- Display object instance: !DumpObj <Address>, !do <Address>
- Display value class instance: !DumpVC <MethodTable> <Address>
- Display array object elements: !DumpArray <Address>, !da <Address>
- Display objects representing async state machines (all, by type): !DumpAsync -completed -tasks, !DumpAsync -completed -tasks -type <TypeName>
- Display object size: !ObjSize <ObjectAddress>
- Display object managed heap location and size: !GCWhere <ObjectAddress>
- Display object references (roots): !GCRoot <ObjectAddress>
- Display object references (roots) from condemned generation (wait for GC, display references): !FindRoots -gen <N> | !FindRoots -gen any, !FindRoots <ObjectAddress>
- Display objects preceding and following an address: !ListNearObj <Address>, !lno <Address>
- Display finalizable objects: !FinalizeQueue, !fq
- Display SyncBlock: !SyncBlk, !SyncBlk -all
- Display System.* object types used in the current process: !DumpRuntimeTypes
- Display CLR data structures (full, GC only, Assembly Loader only): !EEHeap, !EEHeap -gc, !EEHeap -loader
- Display process native heap: !heap -s
- Display heap generation sizes and heap generation free spaces: !HeapStat
- Display object type AssemblyLoadContext: !DumpALC <ObjectAddress>

### Methods

- Display disassembly (current, forward, backwards): u @rip, u <StartAddress>, ub <StartAddress>
- Display managed disassembly (current, address, MethodDesc, GCInfo data, exception data, no source): !U @rip, !U <CodeAddress>, !U <MethodDesc>, !U -gcinfo <...>, !U -ehinfo <...>, !U -n <...>
- Display MethodDesc: !DumpMD <MethodDesc>
- Display MethodDesc for specified address that has been JIT compiled: !IP2MD <CodeAddress>
- Display managed method MSIL: !DumpIL <MethodDesc>
- Display exception handling blocks in a method (using code address, using MethodDesc): !EHInfo <CodeAddress>, !EHInfo <MethodDesc>
- Display MethodDesc structures associated with a delegate object: !DumpDelegate <DelegateObjectAddress>

### Breakpoints

- Set breakpoint (CLR load, module load, address, module function, source line): sxe ld clr, sxe ld <Library.dll>, bp <Address>, bp <Library!Function>, bp "<Source.cs>:<N>"
- Set breakpoint at module method (specific method, MethodDesc, list, clear all): !bpmd ByteZoo.Console.dll Program.Main, !bpmd -md <MethodDesc>, !bpmd -list, !bpmd -clearall
- Set breakpoint when specific exception is thrown: !StopOnException -create <TypeName> 1, !soe -create <TypeName> 1
- Control execution (start, step over, step into, step to next call, step to next return): g, p, t, pc, pt

### Symbols

- Display symbol path: .sympath
- Set symbol path: .sympath srv*C:\Development\Symbols*https://msdl.microsoft.com/download/symbols
- Reload module symbols (lazy, immediate): .reload, .reload /f

### Extensions

- Display loaded extensions: .chain
- Load extension (.NET Core, .NET Framework 4, .NET Framework 1/2/3, NetExt): .loadby sos coreclr, .loadby sos clr, .loadby sos mscorwks, .cordll -ve -u -l; .load netext;

### Windows

- Display managed handles (all, summary, per application domain): !GCHandles, !GCHandles -stat, !GCHandles -perdomain
- Display open handle (type only, all types): !handle, !handle 0 15
- Search memory for references to strong and pinned managed handles: !GCHandleLeaks
- Lists the COM apartment model for each thread: !COMState
- Display RCW list pending cleanup: !RCWCleanupList <Address>
- Display RCW: !DumpRCW <RCWAddress>
- Display CCW: !DumpCCW <CCWAddress>

### Diagnostics

- Display current exception (exception, hang): !analyze -v, !analyze -v -hang
- Display last OOM exception based on GC heap allocation request: !AnalyzeOOM
- Check managed heap for signs of corruption: !VerifyHeap
- Check object for signs of corruption: !VerifyObj <ObjectAddress>

### Utilities

- Clear screen: .cls
- Manage command log file (start, stop): .openlog <FileName>, .logclose
- Manage in-memory stress log file (save): !DumpLog <FileName>
- Manage GC history using stress log (initialize, references, relocations, movements): !HistInit, !HistObjFind <ObjectAddress>, !HistObj <ObjectAddress>, !HistRoot <ObjectAddress>
- Display CPU registers: r
- Display data region (pointer, .NET string, pointers to symbols): dp <Address> L1, du <ObjectAddress>+C L<Lenght>, dps <StartAddress> <EndAddress>
- Display method/field structure: !DumpSig <SigAddress> <ModuleAddress>
- Display method/field structure single element: !DumpSigElem <SigAddress> <ModuleAddress>
- Display MethodTable or MethodDesc for the specified metadata token: !Token2EE <ModuleName> <Token>
- Evaluate expression (regular, C++, MASM): ? <expression>, ?? <expression>, ?? @@masm(<expression>)
- Display native command help: .hh <command>, .hh lm
- Display extension command help: !<ext>.help <command>, !sos.help <command>
- Numbers (decimal, hexadecimal, binary): 0n<Number>, 0x<Number>, 0y<Number>
- Automatic Pseudo Registers (instruction pointer, return address, user defined): $ip, $ra, $t0-$t19

### NetExt

- Objects
  - Index & display objects: !windex, !windex -flush, !windex -enumtypes, !windex -tree
  - Display objects without indexing: !wheap, !wheap -detailsonly, !wheap -nothrottle, !wheap -type <TypeName>
  - Display unique stack objects: !wstack
  - Display heap exceptions: !wdae
  - Display GC root handles: !wgchandle, !wgchandle -summary, !wgchandle -type <TypeName>
- Object Details
  - Display object details: !wdo <ObjectAddress>
  - Display object fields & nested fields: !wselect * from <ObjectAddress>, !wselect <FieldList> from <ObjectAddress>
  - Display object details using SQL syntax: !wfrom -type <TypeName> where <Contidion> select <FieldList>, !wfrom -type System.String where $contains($string(), "Text") select $addr(), $string()
- Specialized Objects
  - Display exception details: !wpe <ObjectAddress>
  - Display SqlCommand objects (all, stored procedures only, active, specific command text): !wsql, !wsql -sproc, !wsql -active, !wsql -command <PartialCommandText>
  - Display HTTP cookie objects: !wcookie
  - Display WCF service objects: !wservice
  - Display all .config file lines in memory: !wconfig
  - Display socket objects: !wsocket
  - Display NameObjectCollectionBase derived objects: !wkeyvalue <ObjectAddress>
  - Display WIF token and claims: !wtoken
  - Display XML document details: !wxml <ObjectAddress>
  - Display HttpContext objects (IIS only): !whttp, !whttp -running, !whttp -status <Value>, !whttp -notstatus <Value>, !whttp -verb <Verb>
  - Display Application Pool details (IIS only): !wapppool
  - Display Application Pool runtime details (IIS only): !wruntime
- Process Details
  - Display process .NET version: !wver
  - Display process environment variables: !wvar
  - Display application domains: !wdomain
  - Display application modules: !wmodule, !wmodule -managed
  - Display threads: !wthreads
  - Display current thread stack trace (managed only): !wclrstack
  - Display current thread stack trace (native and managed): !wk
- Utilities
  - Evaluate expression list: !weval <expression>
  - Switch current runtime: !wsetruntime <Runtime>
  - Check for extension updates: !wupdate
  - Display command help: !whelp <Command>

### HttpClient

- Active Requests
  !wfrom -type *.HttpConnection where (_inUse == 1) select $addr(), _currentRequest._method._method, _currentRequest._requestUri._string
  !wfrom -type *.HttpClient where (_disposed == 0) select $addr()
  .foreach ($instance {!DumpHeap -short -type HttpClient+<<SendAsync>}) {!wfrom -obj $instance where (m_result == 0) select StateMachine.__4__this, StateMachine.request._requestUri._string}
  .foreach ($instance {!DumpHeap -short -type <SendAsyncCore>}) {!wfrom -obj $instance where (m_result == 0) select StateMachine.__4__this, StateMachine.request._requestUri._string}
- Completed Requests
  !wfrom -type *.HttpResponseMessage select $addr(), _statusCode, _requestMessage._method._method, _requestMessage._requestUri._string, $rawfield(_content._bufferedContent._buffer)
  !wfrom -type *.HttpConnection where (_inUse == 0) select $addr()
  !wfrom -type *.HttpClient where (_disposed == 1) select $addr()
  .foreach ($instance {!DumpHeap -short -type HttpClient+<<SendAsync>}) {!wfrom -obj $instance where (m_result != 0) select m_result}
  .foreach ($instance {!DumpHeap -short -type <SendAsyncCore>}) {!wfrom -obj $instance where (m_result != 0) select m_result}
- All Requests
  !wfrom -type *.HttpConnection select $addr(), _inUse
  !wfrom -type *.HttpClient select $addr(), _disposed
  !wfrom -type *.HttpRequestMessage select $addr(), _method._method, _requestUri._string

### Kestrel

- Active Requests
  !wfrom -type *.Http.Http1Connection* where (_requestProcessingStatus != 0) select $addr(), _methodText, _parsedRawTarget, _requestId, _endpoint._DisplayName_k__BackingField, _responseBytesWritten, _requestProcessingStatus
  !wfrom -type *.Http.DefaultHttpContext select $addr(), _request._features._Collection_k__BackingField._methodText, _request._features._Collection_k__BackingField._parsedRawTarget, _request._features._Collection_k__BackingField._requestId, _request._features._Collection_k__BackingField._endpoint._DisplayName_k__BackingField, _request._features._Collection_k__BackingField._responseBytesWritten, _request._features._Collection_k__BackingField._requestProcessingStatus, _response._features._Collection_k__BackingField._requestId, _response._features._Collection_k__BackingField._responseBytesWritten, _response._features._Collection_k__BackingField._requestProcessingStatus
  !wfrom -type *.Http.DefaultHttpRequest select $addr(), _features._Collection_k__BackingField._methodText, _features._Collection_k__BackingField._parsedRawTarget, _features._Collection_k__BackingField._requestId, _features._Collection_k__BackingField._endpoint._DisplayName_k__BackingField, _features._Collection_k__BackingField._responseBytesWritten, _features._Collection_k__BackingField._requestProcessingStatus
  !wfrom -type *.Http.DefaultHttpResponse select $addr(), _features._Collection_k__BackingField._methodText, _features._Collection_k__BackingField._parsedRawTarget, _features._Collection_k__BackingField._requestId, _features._Collection_k__BackingField._endpoint._DisplayName_k__BackingField, _features._Collection_k__BackingField._responseBytesWritten, _features._Collection_k__BackingField._requestProcessingStatus
- Pending Requests
  !wfrom -type *.Http.Http1Connection* where (_requestProcessingStatus == 0) select $addr(), _parsedRawTarget
- List Middleware
  !wfrom -type *Middleware select $addr(), $typename()

### Statements

.foreach ($instance {!wheap -type System.Collections.Generic.Dictionary* -short}) {.echo "${$instance}-${$instance}"}
.foreach ($instance {!windex -short -type System.Collections.Generic.Dictionary*}) {!wselect * from $instance}
!wfrom -type System.Collections.Generic.Dictionary* where ($contains($typename(), "<System.")) && (_count > 0) select $typename(), _count
!wfrom -type ByteZoo.Console.Types.Reference.Classes.EmployeeDataExtended* where !$contains($typename(), "[]") select $typename(), PublicId, _FirstName_k__BackingField, _LastName_k__BackingField
!wfrom -type System.String where $substr($string(), 0, 6) == "User 0" select $a("Address\t", $addr()), $a("Value\t", $string()), $a("Length\t", _stringLength)