# .NET Core Troubleshooting (Performance, Stress Log)

This article outlines the steps to troubleshoot performance issues in a .NET Core application using the Stress Log.

## Stress Log

The Stress Log is a .NET Core Runtime in-memory logging feature implemented as an in-process circular ring buffer. Unlike standard logging (`DOTNET_LogEnable`), the Stress Log is available in all runtime builds, including Debug, Checked and Retail. Although it is not officially supported, this feature is available to developers and partners and even has a good amount of documentation available at SOS Debugging Extension level. Circular means that new entries will replace older ones on threads which have reached their buffer limit.

The purpose of the Stress Log is defined as:

> To aid in diagnosing hard-to-reproduce stress failures, the CLR team added an in-memory log capability. The idea was to avoid using locks or I/O which could disturb a fragile repro environment.

The main advantages of the Stress log are:

* Lightweight: Since the log is internal to the .NET application, there is minimum processing overhead to maintain this log. The only additional code being executed is to add log entry chunks. There is no OS switching nor inter-process communication as with other logging mechanisms (e.g. console or file logging).
* Non-Intrusive: The Stress Log does not alter any existing code, nor does it inject any new code into the target application.
* Easy To Use: Both Stress Log configuration and log data are fairly straightforward to use.

Some disadvantages of the Stress Log are that it is not extensible, is not officially supported and some of the events might change without notice.

## Problem

To see the Stress Log in action, we will look to measure the time it takes to execute a [Static Constructor](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/classes-and-structs/static-constructors) that populates a static field.

Let's review the following code snippet:

```
public class Employee(string position) : Person
{

    internal static Employee Empty;

    static Employee()
    {
        Thread.Sleep(Random.Shared.Next(100));
        Empty = new("");
    }

}
```

The code shows an `Employee` class with an internal static `Empty` field, which is being initialized in the `Employee()` static constructor. The static constructor contains a `Thread.Sleep()` statement that causes a random delay between 0 ms and 99 ms.

Our goal is to determine the overall `Employee()` static constructor execution duration, including the random delay.

## Prerequisites

In this scenario we need to enable the Stress Log data collection, start the application, take a core dump and analyze the Stress Log data.

To configure the Stress Log, we set the following environment variables before launching the target application:

```
export DOTNET_StressLog=1
export DOTNET_LogFacility=0x00000400
export DOTNET_LogLevel=8
```

* `DOTNET_StressLog=1`: Turns the Stress Log on.
* `DOTNET_LogFacility`: The log facility is a bit mask that specifies which logging categories will be enabled. The default value is `0xFFFFFFBF`, if not explicitly specified, and the maximum is `0xFFFFFFFF`. The `0x00000400` value in this case represents all Class Loader (`LF_CLASSLOADER`) events. The categories are defined at [loglf.h](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/coreclr/inc/loglf.h).
* `DOTNET_LogLevel`: This option specifies the verbosity of the log entries with 1 being the lowest (`LL_FATALERROR`) and 10 being the highest (`LL_EVERYTHING`). The default level, if not specified is 6 (`LL_INFO1000`). The `8` value in this case represents level 8 (`LL_INFO100000`) verbosity. The levels are defined at [log.h](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/coreclr/inc/log.h).

> [!NOTE]
> There are two additional options - `DOTNET_StressLogSize` (log size in bytes per thread, default = 128 KB) and `DOTNET_TotalStressLogSize` (total log size in bytes, default = 32 MB) - that are not applicable in this case.

After we have configured the Stress Log, we can start the application, take a core dump using `createdump` and load it into [LLDB](https://lldb.llvm.org/). For more details, see [Create .NET Core Dumps On Linux](/Resources/Articles/Prerequisites/Create%20.NET%20Core%20Dumps%20On%20Linux.md) and [Load .NET Core Dumps In LLDB On Linux](/Resources/Articles/Prerequisites/Load%20.NET%20Core%20Dumps%20In%20LLDB%20On%20Linux.md).

## Analysis

First, we load the core dump into LLDB and examine the contents of the Stress Log using:

```
histinit
```

Output:
```
Attempting to read Stress log
STRESS LOG:
    facilitiesToLog  = 0x80000400
    levelToLog       = 8
    MaxLogSizePerThread = 0x20000 (131072)
    MaxTotalLogSize = 0x2000000 (33554432)
    CurrentTotalLogChunk = 22
    ThreadsWithLogs  = 16
    Clock frequency  = 1.000 GHz
    Start time         18:27:09
    Last message time  18:27:12
    Total elapsed time 3.202 sec
................................................................
---------------------------- 4254 total entries ------------------------------------
SUCCESS: GCHist structures initialized
```

The command output shows that the Stress Log contains 4,254 entries.

> [!NOTE]
> The `histinit` command is optional and is only used to confirm the Stress Log configuration.

Next, we export the Stress Log to a text file using:

```
dumplog ./StressLog.log
```

Output:
```
Attempting to dump Stress log to file './StressLog.log'
Writing to file: ./StressLog.log
Stress log in module 0x00007F37E5600000
Stress log address = 0x00007F37E5D23D60
................................................................
SUCCESS: Stress log dumped
```

> [!NOTE]
> This `dumplog` command exports the Stress Log from the core dump to a `StressLog.log` text file in the current folder.

Before we look at the Stress Log export, we need to get the MethodTable value of the `Employee` class that contains the static constructor we are interested in.

We can use the following to get the `Employee` class MethodTable:

```
name2ee ByteZoo.Blog.Common.dll!ByteZoo.Blog.Common.Models.Business.Employee
```

Output:
```
Module:      00007f376769a1b8
Assembly:    ByteZoo.Blog.Common.dll
Token:       0000000002000039
MethodTable: 00007f376860ba58
EEClass:     00007f376860ba58
Name:        ByteZoo.Blog.Common.Models.Business.Employee
```

> [!NOTE]
> The output shows that the `Employee` class MethodTable is `0x00007F376860BA58`.

Finally, we can analyze the Stress Log export file `StressLog.log` using the following:

```
grep -i "7F376860BA58" StressLog.log | grep " RunClassInit:" | sed "s/[^a-zA-Z0-9_ .:()\`]//g" | sort
```

Output:
```
22e4   0.108165639 : `CLASSLOADER`        RunClassInit: Calling class constructor for type 0x7f376860ba58 ()
22e4   0.183284417 : `CLASSLOADER`        RunClassInit: Returned Successfully from class constructor for type 0x7f376860ba58 ()
```

The Stress Log file contains four columns:

* OSID: The first column is the OS Thread ID (OSID) of the thread that generated the event.
* Timestamp: The second column is the log entry timestamp converted into duration (sec) from the application startup.
* Log Facility: The third column contains the Log Facility name. The facility name is expressed as `facility1``facility2``facility3` to allow for filtering.
* Log Message: The fourth column contains the log message.

> [!NOTE]
> You can use your favorite text editor instead of the `grep` command and search for the MethodTable value (`7F376860BA58`).

The Stress Log output shows that the `Employee` static constructor completed in 75.12 ms (0.183284417 - 0.108165639).

## Conclusion

The Stress Log facility combined with other tools can be a very powerful tool to troubleshoot complex performance issues. You have to be careful how you configure this log, since there are hundreds of different types of events and, depending on the verbosity, there could be millions of entries generated in a short period of time, which will obscure the important information and render the log data useless.

> [!NOTE]
> If you want to find different types of Stress Log entries you can check [stresslog.h](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/coreclr/inc/stresslog.h) and search the .NET Runtime source code for `STRESS_LOGN()` instances.

## References

* [.NET Core Concepts (Summary)](/Resources/Articles/Concepts/.NET%20Core%20Concepts%20(Summary).md)
* [.NET Core Troubleshooting (Hub)](/Resources/Articles/Troubleshooting/.NET%20Core%20Troubleshooting%20(Hub).md)
* [Article Source Code](/Sources)

<!--- Category = Tags = .NET Core, .NET Troubleshooting, .NET Analysis, Linux --->