# .NET Core Troubleshooting (Hub)

The purpose of this article is to serve as a hub for a series of articles that focus on analysis and troubleshooting .NET Core application issues.

## Introduction

In most cases, the analysis and especially troubleshooting are based on a particular application issue. As the complexity of issue grows, it becomes more difficult to identify the root cause. For example, a short and erratic CPU spike or gradual memory leak that happens over days and weeks are not trivial to troubleshoot.

In other cases, even if there are no immediate problems, analysis might still be necessary. Such scenarios include optimization (CPU, RAM), major releases or migrations.

The goal of this series is to provide an understanding of the inner workings of .NET Core application running on Linux. I am a firm believer that before you try to fix an application issue, you first need to know exactly what the issue is. Once you know how the application works and what the issue is, that puts you in a great position. You will be able to properly fix the problem, evaluate the best solution and make sure the fix works as expected.

The approach in these articles, is to use scenarios to illustrate various aspects of .NET Core application execution. The scenarios will focus on specific concepts rather than a particular issue or troubleshooting tool.

## Scenarios

The scenarios are grouped in the following categories:

* Application Hangs: These are scenarios where the application is not working. They can range from short pauses (application stutter) to complete deadlocks or hangs. The scenarios are usually based on shared resources or resource contention.
* High CPU Usage: These are scenarios where the application is doing more processing than expected. These can range from occasional CPU spikes to 100% CPU utilization on one or all cores. Although high CPU utilization in and of itself is not an issue, it can be caused by inefficient application logic or improper use of system resources.
* Exceptions: These are scenarios where the application fails. The failures can range from hidden exceptions (not visible to the end users) to complete crashes. Such exceptions usually result in unintended application behavior and/or improper use of system resources.
* Resource Leaks: These are scenarios where a system resource usage grows over time. Examples of such leaks are - managed memory leaks, native memory leaks, file handle leaks, port leaks and socket leaks. The resource leaks can be gradual (over the span of days or weeks) and exponential (seconds or minutes) and usually result in application or even system crashes.

## References

* [.NET Core Concepts (Summary)](/Resources/Articles/Concepts/.NET%20Core%20Concepts%20(Summary).md)
* [.NET Core Troubleshooting (Application Hang)](/Resources/Articles/Troubleshooting/.NET%20Core%20Troubleshooting%20(Application%20Hang).md)

<!--- Category = Tags = .NET Core, .NET Troubleshooting, .NET Analysis, Linux --->